okay, we've got the tape rolling okay, I have just one more question on the
immortals as you were noting, the TV series concentrated on the idea of the
chase but the book had a totally different, well it wasn't a chase in the novel,
you had some other ideas I think about medicine and so forth could you just
well, my concern was not particular, well certainly, the notion of the search
for the immortal, the person that I call Cartwright, Marshall Cartwright, was in
there to provide a core of interest, but I was primarily interested in the novel
on the impact of the possibility of immortality on society itself and interested
in dealing with those kinds of impulses that people have relating to immortality
and longevity, and in a certain sense, the immortals emboys as well as anything
else that I've written my basic philosophical position in my work that can be
traced through almost all of it, I suspect, that there are no real villains in
life there are only people who want the same things everybody else wants but who
are willing to do to get them things that other people are not willing to do and
that the best things in life can be wanted too much that anything that is
considered good can be an evil, and I suppose one of the basic concepts with
which I began The Immortals was the concept that everybody thinks it would be
wonderful to live forever, but what if you had a man who accidentally could live
forever, but who also, whose blood could rejuvenate other people, and his life
would be made miserable. And from there, of course, the entire extrapolation
about the ways in which society, knowing the possibility of immortality, people
would force society to pour more and more and more money into medicine
until the law of diminishing returns would mean that half of the world would be
devoted to medicine and everybody else would be starving in the slum.
Okay, fine. Let me skip forward to one of your more recent books. I think the
hardback edition was called The Dreamers. I think the hardback edition is called
The Mind Master. Right. I guess the scientific basis, or the thing that you're
working with in that book, is chemical memory. Right. Could you explain the
scientific basis for that? Yes. As long ago as a quarter of a century ago,
experiments began at various places and were continued at the University of
Michigan by a man named McConnell with a simple kind of life called planarian
worms. and in other places with rats and even chickens and other kinds of
vertebrate life. And some of the experiments that they did seemed to indicate
that memory can be transmitted chemically. Some of the worms, for instance, who
learned to travel through simple mazes would be chopped up and fed to the other
worms, and they seemed to learn how to go through the mazes quicker. Similarly,
some of the rats that they trained who normally prefer dark places and fear
light could be trained by electric shocks to do just the opposite, to prefer
light places and fear going into dark places, and then they would make an
extract of their brains and inject it in other rats, and they seemed to exhibit
the same kind of behavior as if it had been injected in them from the other
rats. And many experiments have actually gone on in this area. Now, not
everybody, all biologists do not believe that this is true. They don't believe
in the evidence and think it can be explained in other ways, But at least there
is a solid body of scientific evidence which suggests that maybe there's
something going on there. And I took these possibilities and asked myself what
would happen if it really were perfected, if one could encode information into
molecules, protein molecules. They seem to think they could probably use
messenger RNA perhaps. and this information could be injected to other people so
that they would not have to study it or learn about it in the class. They would
have the information from an injection. And then beyond that, I sort of used
that notion peripherally in my novel Campus. And then beyond that, when I took
up the dreamers, I based an entire world upon the notion that people would want
to go beyond knowledge to experience, and they would live lives which were
basically injections of other people's experiences which they would be able to
obtain in the form of injection. Well, now, the mnemonist in that story, I think
that's the way it would be pronounced. You describe him as a decision maker and
sort of a memory machine, but I still had a few little vague spots about what
actually his function was or what he did. Could you just explain that briefly?
Well, my feeling was, and of course the mnemonic, there are four sections which
really serve as a frame for three other major dramatic episodes, each of which
is a kind of love story. and I really embedded him in order to sort of link the
other three together in more than simply a subject or location way.
Nevertheless, he does function, I think, in the book rather interestingly.
but I felt that a world like this which primarily exists
because of computers and machine operations might be able to continue for a
while without human intervention but that inevitably some kinds of imperfections
would creep in and that it could not over the long run continue to exist. And I
felt the need of, that there would be a need for someone like the Mnomonas to
exercise a basic kind of unifying control over the machines to keep them, to
make the decisions that needed to be made which were outside perhaps of the
range of decision making that the computers would have. and his need when the
story begins is that he recognizes that his body, his physical body is
deteriorating after many, many years as being sort of part of the flow of
information and that he needs to find his successor if this world is going to
continue and his exploration of the lives of these three people in the Freedict
episode as part of his effort to find that successor.
But at the end of that book, if I read it correctly or if I remember it
correctly, the mnemonist doesn't seem to be able to find a replacement. He's
sort of getting tired of what he's doing and he's yearning for an end to
everything. Of course, he also is dying. He recognizes the fact that he's dying,
which is what impels him to seek a replacement. And each replacement that he
samples falls short in one way or another, does not have the kind of dedication
to information that he has. And ultimately all of them fail. And he himself, at
the end, stops. trails off into nothing because he is dying, that is. And he
also kind of longs for an end to this continual flow of information. Well, would
I be wrong in reading the end of that book, too, as sort of a comment on the
fact that this kind of lifestyle of dreaming is sort of a dead-end, existence?
No, I think that's quite true. It is a comment on the fact that this, that
dreaming itself is a non-survival characteristic. It may be, well, the most
satisfying, ultimately the most satisfying experience, but as perhaps I said in
the Joymakers is perhaps repeated here in a different way, that ultimate
satisfaction or dreaming is a death activity, and that survival
demands something less than total satisfaction. It demands a certain kind of
sacrifice, of gratification for other goals. And it demands a certain kind of
dissatisfaction. You know, life, I guess one might say, is dissatisfaction.
yeah one more comment or question on that book being a literary person myself
I'm always fascinated with the way you work in great literary classics or
allusions in your work that's a kind of weakness of mine I think I do like
epigraphs and throughout my books I've sprinkled them perhaps more than most
people are interested in I think they're beautifully done the listeners of
course was sort of, uses the poem the listeners in the background and then for
instance with the mnemonist I think it was perfect to use say Tennyson's Lotus
Eaters as an escape, a dream But my question would be my particular one on that
book, the last episode, the one with the dreamer when you sort of actually in a
fascinating way retell a story of the Iliad A lot of people haven't thought that
was so great but I thought it was great, I'm glad you agree with me I really,
really enjoyed doing that one. No, that was fascinating. I have been trying to
find ways I could work that book into my world literature class and have the
kids read that instead of the real Elliot. Well, I have one review from Texas, I
think, some Texas newspaper that was sent to me who said, you know, he really
betrays his lack of ability when he compares himself with Homer, which wasn't
what I was trying to do. what I was really trying to do in lots of ways was to
re-tell the Iliad from the viewpoint of the Trojans and from basically the
viewpoint of Paris, and to reinterpret the mythical elements as the mistaken
notions of a dreamer that he actually is controlling this dream in the way that
Homer said the gods controlled it. Oh, yeah, no, it worked very well. I think it
gives, you know, just the whole idea of using a work of literature, a great work
of literature within your own work gives it a resonance or a depth. I'm glad you
feel that way. I certainly felt like that. I thought it was really the most
successful of the three stories, but three episodes. One more question on that.
I have thought of the dreamer himself becomes so obsessed with the dream and his
love for hell and that he you know stays in it and does away with everything
else in his own life and obviously he's going to die at the end of it right in
the dream he's going to die in fact there are premonitions yes okay now is he
going to die in real life too it's my feeling yes that he's become so you know
he's cut himself off so much from the rest of existence and that he has become
So self-identified With Paris That he is going to When the arrow The poisoned
arrow Flies through the sky And strikes him in the eye And the wrist and so
forth That that's going to kill him Obviously Paris cannot survive The Iliad And
my feeling is Although other people could argue with it Was that Samuel the
dreamer will die also at that moment. No, that was my impression. I thought he
would, too. Listen, almost, well, much of your work, not all of it, but say the
Immortals, the Joymakers, the Listeners, the Dreamers, and so forth. This has
been noted by, I guess, readers of yours, but those books are set up as sort of
a series of novelettes or interrelated novelettes. And I wondered why you picked
that particular writing style. Well, I might say that only about three or four
of my books are not written that way. My first two books were not. Campus is
not. It was written as a novel, a kind of episodic novel, and The Magician's was
not. But this was a conscious decision back when I was freelance writing full
-time and I was trying to make a living at it. And I wrote my
first novel, This Fortress World, And it took me about three months Which was
neither particularly fast Nor particularly slow It was the way Speed which I was
writing other things And Out of that I made a total of about $500 Because it
wasn't serialized Anywhere Since then it's made more than that But at the time
It only brought me that much money And I also wrote Starbridge In collaboration
with Jack Williamson at just about the same time, and out of that, I got half of
$500, $250. So I had, as a total return for six months of work, was about $750,
and I decided that wouldn't do. You know, I couldn't make a living that way. And
I also had the feeling, as I expressed in my collection, my Scribner's
collection, Some Dreams and Nightmares, I also had the feeling that really the
ideal form for science fiction is not the novel, but the novelette, or the short
novel, because the novel demands a kind of solution to a major problem for which
basically no solutions are possible, if they were possible, problems would
already be solved. And also, most novels, most science fiction novels, tend to
start at a very high level of intensity and kind of fall apart at the end. The
intensity and interest is hard to sustain, and when you try to wind it up, it
seems kind of flat. Whereas in the novelette, you aren't required to resolve
major problems, only the particular problems within the novelette, but you have
length enough to establish a different world in which to operate. So at that
time, I decided that when I got a novel idea, I would think of it in terms of
novelettes, which I get published in the magazines and then bring together in
the form of a book and thus get paid twice for it. And out of that came what's
since become known as Gunn's Law among the students in my institute, which is
nothing is worth writing unless you can sell it at least twice. And as a
consequence, I have since that time mostly written my novels in the form of
publishable
fragments for individual stories. And in a way, I think it's worked rather well,
because in The Joymakers, I was able to use as a framework, as a subject matter,
really an idea rather than a person or a group of people. And so this novel,
which extended over about 200 years, picked up several different people, but
basically it was about one thing, the science of happiness. And similarly, The
Immortals, which also continued for about 200 years, and the listeners, which
covered about 150 years. And all
of these seem to me to focus on an idea, which is what science fiction mostly
does, and deals historically or in a future history way with its development
without feeling compelled to carry any character through entirely in a way which
might be difficult to achieve. legitimately. Yeah, okay. Gunn's law is a little
bit disillusioning to me. Well, I would say that it's not completely commercial.
And as a matter of fact, it seems to me to apply to other kinds of endeavor.
That is, that there are an awful lot of things that people can put their hands
to, ways to spend their time, to spend their creative and intellectual energies.
And you have to be able to judge between these. How are you going to spend your
time? Particularly in terms of a writer. He has so many ideas that he's never
going to be able to deal with them all in his lifetime. And so he has to be able
to choose between them. And it seems to me, Gunn's law says, think about those
which are most productive, which have the most substance to them. And they are
the ones that you ought to focus on, not simply crassly the money they might
bring in, but the audiences to which they might have something to say. Oh, I
understand that. I was being facetious when I said that, but the reason I
brought it up, we interviewed Jack Vance, and I asked him what he would like to
be remembered for, or as, you know, when he finishes the body of his work, and
he said, I would like to be remembered as a very rich science fiction writer.
Yeah, well, I've given up that notion. You know, I think that's, I realize I'm
never going to be rich unless the listeners, which is now under option to a
television studio, is turned into a long-running television series, which I
doubt, or some other one of my books is picked up and made into a gigantic
movie. I'm going to have to be satisfied doing what I'm doing and it's really
worked out pretty well. Well, I would have said that almost any work that you've
written, it's so strong in terms of the idea behind it that any one of those
would make beautiful series or movies. I can't understand why they haven't even
picked up more. Well, there have been. The listeners was picked up before and
some of my other stories have been picked up. I think one of the reasons why, in
a sense, some of the television, motion picture companies have been interested
is because of my experience in playwriting. My work tends to be pretty visual
and to occur in the form of scenes which can be visualized as taking place. And
I think that visual quality, as well as the idea behind it, is appealing. And I
think for another aspect of it, I've always felt that each book was a different
task. And I approached each, not as any sequel to anything, but as an individual
problem in writing. And did them all individually and never, as far as I can
remember, ever having written anything strictly for money. It was always because
I wanted to write it. No, I would have suspected that. Listen, I have more
material, but this is taking a great deal of your time, I'm sure. Well, I'm
willing to go on as long as you are. Well, I don't... That might be a little...
That might take too much time, but if you're still OK, I do have some more. OK,
go ahead. I just wanted to check with you. OK,
let's see. Let me just skip to a whole new area. I did have some more questions
about your work, but let me go ahead to the different here.
Oh, let's see, what about ... Well,
some of your short stories? Let me make this kind of two questions, I guess. I
was going to ask you a question about fantasy, just sort of, in general, how you
differentiate it from science fiction and why you don't write more of it. But
some of your short stories, you do get, I guess, kind of, I'm not sure playful
is the right word, but one of my favorites was Cinderella Story, where you sort
of retold the, I guess, the folk tale of Cinderella. Well, let me specify, let
me focus down. Why did you do that, just to have a fun story to write? well it
just uh the idea occurred to me uh and um in part i think uh because um myths
and fairy tales are good things to retell uh and bob sheckley for instance has
done a lot of these and in fact at one time when i was talking to him about a
problem i have with story, I've forgotten which one it was. He said, well, my
period says whenever I have a problem, just go look for a good fair jail, and it
will fill the gap. I didn't, I don't know whether that occurred to me at the
time, but certainly I did have the notion that I I was going to retell this
story as another kind of, as it might have worked out under different kinds of
influences. And I think you are right, occasionally I do like to tell a story in
kind of a playful and I hope amusing way. My own feeling about fantasy,
I haven't written a great deal of it, mostly because I don't think you can say
things, you can incorporate ideas in fantasy as easily, and most of the
fantasies I've done have been rather humorous, and
mostly I guess I'm concerned with writing an idea that really, really grabs me
by the throat and says deal with me I also have the feeling too I think that
fantasy is somehow not quite as good as science fiction because it doesn't
demand the same kind of rigor it seems a little looser a little freer and thus
maybe less less demanding Maybe it's too easy to write Certainly today there's
an awful lot of fantasy being published Mostly adventure fantasy And I find this
uninteresting And I'm kind of deplored a little bit Because I wonder who out
there is reading it And whether the people who are reading it Belong to a group
Like the people who are into the occult And into UFOs and who are looking for
some answer other than the human intelligence and the human courage to solve the
problem. Yeah, I was going to ask you why you thought it was so popular today.
It seems to be. Yeah, and I think, I'm not sure. Dealing with this in the SFRA
annual meeting that's coming up, I've just gotten finished writing the first
draft of an article, which I may use as an address for that meeting in July,
dealing with the question of the audience that may or may not be out there for
fantasy. It may be a publishing phenomenon stimulated by Tolkien's Lord of the
Rings trilogy success. And, but there apparently are people out there buying it
and reading it. And in a way it, it represents a kind of dangerous tendency. I
think if it is as popular as it seems, because I think it threatens to swamp
the, the science fiction novel, which I think is more important.
This is this sort of a comment We interviewed Terry Carr a couple weeks ago He
thought that fantasy is more difficult to write because to make it to make it
what? To create a real world that's an imaginary one that's not extrapolated
takes he thought more skill than it does to write a science fiction book He may
be right or he may just be a different different people with different
definitions of difficulty.
I recognize the fact that in my fantasies that I've written, I'm not primarily
trying to create a new fantasy world. What I'm trying to do is to change one
element in today's world in a fantastic way and see how contemporary life reacts
to it. And that's a different matter. Okay, just maybe one more question on
fantasy. You sort of implied some ideas about this earlier. You might just
briefly tell me though, why or how, how would you personally differentiate it
from science fiction? I think it's a very important differentiation because I
think it matters in the way we approach science fiction and fantasy as readers.
Science fiction, though it deals with a world that is different from the one we
live in here and now, either through the alteration of one thing or maybe by a
significant alteration in the future. But nevertheless, we recognize that this
is a world that we can get to from here. It exists in our universe, even though
that universe may be far extended into distance or time, but there is a clear
sequence of events which take us there according to the basic laws that we know
operate in terms of both the physical laws and psychological laws and so forth.
In fantasy, it is a radical, different world, but one which we can't get to from
here. It's not our universe. It is some new, different universe in which the
laws are different. And when we read science fiction, we automatically make
intellectual comparisons, you know, really hardcore science fiction. And I think
one thing that's confusing about science fiction is the fact that a lot of other
things are brought into the science fiction adventure romance,
and the gothic and detective story, all of them can be told in science fiction
stories. Nevertheless, in the real hardcore science fiction novel, you're
expected to make intellectual comparisons between here and now and the there and
then of the novel. and this relates on an intellectual level when you read
fantasy you are supposed to be concerned with the human psychology and the
allegorical
meanings you do not use intellectual perceptions of how we got there from here
because there's no way to get there from here and so you read it with acceptance
of the difference and not with questioning of it ok very good listen I better
just ask you just a couple more so we can you know this is this is really taking
too much of your time one thing I would like to get your comment on since you I
think have a very valuable perspective on this do you think science fiction has
changed much since you became involved in it and what were those changes be?
Well, my experience covers 34 years from the time I began writing it, and many
more than that from the time I began reading it. Yes, I think it's changed
significantly. It has gone from being primarily a magazine literature to
primarily a book literature. there are still science fiction magazines being
published but today its primary publication is in book form and it has gone from
being a category literature a generic literature to one of much broader
acceptance and much broader popularity and it's gone from being written like
most other pulp literature rapidly and with a certain carelessness for basic
skills of storytelling, literature, to what is now certainly comparable with any
other kind of writing in terms of its literary value.
I'm sure you've noted this. I wonder what your response to it is. the
proliferation of trilogies that are written these days. Some people feel that
that is sort of leading to second-class writing when people have to write the
trilogy. Do you have any ideas about that? Yes, I would sort of agree with that,
although certainly I can understand the authorial necessity to do it because it
seems to pay off and increase audience and increase sales, and the publishers
wanting to do that. But I agree that I think it's a
poorer...
it's a poorer art form. And I've never really felt the necessity or the
desirability of writing a novel, or writing a sequel. I've always felt that if I
can't say it in one book, I really haven't thought it through very well. I think
the economic pressures are leading authors not only to write sequels but even to
extend series long beyond the point at which their artistic impulses say it
should be ended. Originally, Dune was supposed to be a trilogy, and now Frank
Herbert has accepted a contract in advance to write a fifth volume, simply
because the preceding ones have sold better. Similarly, Gene Wolfe has agreed to
write a fifth volume to his planned tetralogy, the Book of the New Sun. And
young writers, you know, are coming into the field thinking that the way to
success is to take a series of characters and bring them through what
essentially is an adventure, a series of adventures, which is what most
trilogies are. They're adventure novels with very little science fiction
background to them. There are exceptions, of course. Dune and The Book of the
New Sun both are more carefully planned but most series, most trilogies are
simple adventure stories ok, I would just have one more could you tell me what
your future plans are for your own writing in terms of fiction and criticism
both um, right now I'm sort of between books, I have had for a long time a plan
for a very ambitious novel, and maybe I'll get down to working at that one of
these days. I want to write some short stories. Particularly, I want to try to
continue a series of stories that I began with a story called Child of the Sun
several years ago, which I viewed originally as a series and haven't had a
chance to deal with. and I think could be a significant development and one
which I had initially proposed as a television series and was at one point
actually optioned for a possible television series. And I do still have a book
or two of criticism or a collection of stories that I'd like to do. a
collection, for instance, of English science fiction stories because there isn't
anything
currently available I'd like to use in my classes. Mostly the books I've done in
criticism have been those books which I felt I wanted for my class, but I wasn't
able to find anywhere. So I did it myself.
Okay, fine, Mr. Grant. Listen, what we'll do, and I really appreciate the time
you've given us. You're welcome. This is a long time. You wouldn't mind, if we
don't make it up for that SFRA meeting, maybe sometime in the fall we could call
you back and get a little more because there's a whole area of questions like on
the SFRA and SFWA and so forth that we had. But listen, what we'll do is when
these shows are edited, we will send you copies of the tapes. I get it. And
also, I will send you a list. We will find out if there are any stations in your
area that carry the show. Okay. I'd like to know that. And so, if possibly, if
you ever want to pick it up, we don't have a complete list from our syndicator
yet. But when we get it, I'll send that on to you. Well, good luck to you, and
stay in touch. And thank you very much. We appreciate your time, sir. Right.
Bye. Bye.